for bee topic from ganpat official syallbus sem-2 

Theory syllabus Unit Content Hrs  1 D.C. Circuits: Voltage and current sources, Source transformation, Star-Delta transformation, Application of  Kirchhoff’s  Law,  Superposition  theorem,  Thevenin’s  theorem, Norton’s Theorem. 08  2 Capacitor: Types of capacitor, Capacitance of multiple parallel plate capacitor, Energy stored in a capacitor, Charging and discharging of capacitor, Time constant. 04  3 Magnetic Circuit: Law of magnetic circuit, Series & parallel magnetic circuits and calculation, Comparison of magnetic & Electric Circuit. 04  4 Electromagnetic Induction: Review of Faraday’s Law, Lenz’s Law, Self & mutual inductance, Inductance of coupled circuits, Rise and decay of current in inductive circuit. 05    5 AC Circuits: Representation of sinusoidal waveforms, Peak and rms values, Phasor representation, Real power, Reactive power, Apparent power, Power factor, Analysis of single-phase ac circuits consisting of R, L, C, RL, RC, RLC combinations (Series and parallel), Resonance. Three phase balanced circuits, Voltage and current relations in star and delta connections, Measurement of power in 3-phase circuits. 10  6 Transformer: Magnetic materials, B-H characteristics, Working principle, Construction, Core and shell type transformer, Step up and step down transformer. 04  7 Induction motor: Classification of A.C. motors, Construction and working of three-phase motor, Production of rotating field, Synchronous speed, Actual speed, Slip. 04  8 Electrical Installations:  Components of LT switchgear: Switch fuse unit, MCB, ELCB, MCCB, Types of wires and cables, Types of batteries, Important characteristics for batteries, Elementary calculations for energy consumption and power factor improvement.     06 

sem-3 met

Theory Syllabus Unit Content Hrs. 1 DC Fundamentals: ● DC Current Machines, Principle of working, construction, winding, e.m.f. Equation. Armature reaction, commutation, compensating winding. potentiometer, Merits & demerits of A.C. & D.C. Galvanometer, Ammeter, voltmeter 10 2 DC Machines: ● DC generators and DC motors construction and working 8 3 Alternators: ● AC Power Generation, Construction, working principle and routine maintenance 8 4 AC Fundamentals: ● Single phase AC Supply, phase angle, frequency, RMS values current and voltage, AC Ammeter, Voltmeter, Watt meter, Ohmic resistance, Inductive Load, Capacitive Load, Phasor diagram, Real Power, Reactive Power, KVA, Power factor, Power factor improvement using capacitor bank. ● Understand the fundamentals of Alternating Current Know the importance of electromagnetic induction in today’s machinery and systems and the laws governing it Know how to calculate Work, Energy and Power  12 5 Comparison DC Vs AC: ● Waveform Comparison, Constant and RMS value, interconversion of currents, Applications, Loss of Energy comparison  8 6 Basics of AC Distribution:  ● 3 phase AC Supply, phase voltage and current, Line Voltage and current, Power calculation, neutral earthed system, neutral isolated system (Earth, Open Circuit and Short Circuit Faults). 8  Total 54 

sem3 MICE

Theory Syllabus Unit Content Hrs.    1 Introduction & Characteristics of IC Engine: • 4-Stroke and 2-stroke cycles; Deviation from Ideal condition in actual engines; Limitation in parameters.  • Timing Diagrams of 2 - Stroke and 4-Stroke engines. Comparative study of slow speed, medium speed and high speed diesel engines - suitability and requirements for various purposes Mean Piston speed.  • M.C.R. & C.S.R. ratings. Practical heat balance diagrams and thermal efficiency.     06   2 General Description of I.C. Engines:  • Constructional Details of I.C. Engines: Principal Components: fuel Injectors, Air Starting Valves, Relief Valves, hydraulic exhaust valves, air distributors, Jackets and Liners, Cylinder heads, Piston, Cross heads, Connecting rods, Bed Plates, A-frames, Welded construction for Bed plates & frames, Tie rods.   10   3 Scavenging and Supercharging System:  • Scavenging arrangements in 2-Stroke engines; Air charging and exhausting in 4-Stroke engines; Various types of Scavenging in 2-stroke engines; Uni-flow, loop, cross loop and reverse loop scavenging, their merits and demerits.  • Scavenge pumps for normally aspirated engines; under piston scavenging, Scavenge manifolds.   03   4 Supercharging arrangements:  • Pulse and constant pressure type; their relative merits and demerits in highly rated marine propulsion engine.  • Air movements inside the cylinders. Turbocharger and its details. Two stage, un-cooled, radial turbochargers.   03  5 Cooling of I.C. Engines:  • Various Cooling media used; their merits and demerits, cooling of Pistons, cylinder jackets & cylinder heads, Bore cooling, coolant conveying mechanism and system, maintenance of coolant and cooling system  04    6 Combustion & Dissociation:  • Definition of Fuel, combustion. Combustion Equation, Analysis of the Products of Combustion, Stoichiometric combustion, Actual combustion, Excess Air, Mixture strength. Dissociation. Effect of Dissociation on LC-Engines.  • Combustion of Fuels: Grades of suitable fuels, Preparation of fuels for efficient combustions, fuel atomization, ignition quality, fuel injectors and its details, ignition delay, afterburning, Compression Pressure Ration and its effects on Engine. Reasons for variation in compression pressure and peak pressure. Design aspects of combustion chamber. Control of NOX and SOX in Exhaust emission.    09   7 Fuels & Lubricants:  • Composition, properties and characteristics of different fuels and lubricants, additives used, flash point & viscosity as applicable to petrol, kerosene, marine diesel oil, boiler fuel oil, lube oil.  • Sampling and testing procedure, storage and transfer of fuel and lubricants.  • Contamination of fuel and lubricants including microbes.    06    8 Medium speed Engines:  • Different types of medium speed marine diesel engines, couplings, and reduction gear used in conjunction with medium speed Engine, Development in exhaust valve design, V-type engine details.  • Use of poor quality residual fuels and their consequences. • Improvements in designs for higher power output.  • Fuels, combustion process – fundamentals    08  9 Special features of I.C. Engines:  • Development of long-stroke Engines, Implication of stroke-bore ratio.  • Development in materials in construction & heat treatment of M.E. components  05  TOTAL 54 

sem-4 met-II

Theory Syllabus Unit Content Hrs. 1 Synchronous Motors: ●  Construction, Starting and uses onboard 4 2 Induction Motors: ●  Construction, Slip, Power Calculation and efficiencies, uses onboard, Maintenance, Single phasing. 6 3 Comparison:  ● Induction motor Vs Synchronous Motors ● Stepper Motor ● Telemotor  4 4 AC Power generation: ● Alternators, voltage control, frequency control, brushless alternators, Parallel operation of alternators, load sharing and maintenance. 8 5 Power Distribution: ● Bus Bars,  ● Transformers - construction, types, losses 6 6 Breakers and Contactors:  ● MCB, MCCB, ACB, OCB, VCB and Sulphur Hexafluoride type Circuit breakers ● Types of contactors, construction (Main winding and contacts), Normally Open and Normally Closed type, Maintenance of contactors 8 7 Starters: ● Power and circuit diagrams of DOL, Star-Delta, Auto - transformer and soft starter 8 8 Alternative Source of Power: ● Emergency Generator & Different starting method including auto -start, emergency batteries and its different types & duties, Location of emergency power. ● Different Emergency loads, Rules & Regulation of emergency power, Maintenance of the emergency power source on board. Shore Supply - Specifications as per Voltage/frequency, precautions while taking shore supply. 10  Total 54 

sem-4 MAM - marine auxilary machines

Theory Syllabus Unit Content Hrs. 1 General Engine Room Layout:  • Layout of main and auxiliary machinery in engine rooms in different ships. 03     2 Layout of Pipe lines:  • Pipe material, Piping arrangement for steam, bilge, ballast and oil fuel systems, emergency operation arrangements, Lube oil and cooling system lines with various fittings. Domestic fresh water and sea water and sea water hydrophore system. Color code of pipelines,  • Calculation of size of various components and assemblies of marine diesel engine such as pumps, heat exchangers, pipe lines, condenser, exhaust piping.  • Cargo oil pumping system in oil tankers  • Preventive action for leakages in pipes - Isolating a section of pipe, clean & prepare joint faces, select appropriate joining material, reassembling and test hydraulically     11  3 Filters and Strainers:  • Difference between Strainers and filters, types of marine filters, different types of filter materials, auto-clean and Duplex filters, Static filters, micro filters.  • Priming and core maintenance of filters   04     4 Pumps and pumping systems:  • Types of pumps for various requirements, their characteristics and application in ships. Centrifugal Pumps, Gear Pumps, Screw Pumps and Reciprocating pumps, Care and Maintenance of pumps.  • Care and Maintenance of centrifugal pumps – check for wear & wastage of casing, trueness of shaft, condition of bearing, seals, wear rings & alignment of pump and motor.  • Care and maintenance of reciprocating pumps- measure of cylinder liner wear , ring gaps , overhaul valve/seats , various links , bushes , relief valve , gland packing etc.  • Care and maintenance of gear and screw pumps- check clearance and back lashes  • Automation and control of pumps & pumping systems, Pump losses & efficiency, NPSH Performance     12   5 Blowers and Compressors:  • Operational and constructional details of blowers and compressors used on board ships.  • Uses of compressed air.  • Air Bottles: Construction, mountings & associated system.    04 • Ventilation fans and ducting arrangements for Engine room, Pump room & Cargo spaces.    6 Evaporators:  • Construction and Operation of different types of evaporators. Fresh Water generators and distillers.  • Reverse Osmosis process, Conditioning arrangements of distilled water for drinking purpose    06  7 Heat Exchangers:  • Tubular and plate type, reasons for corrosion.  • Tube removal and plugging of tubes  • Materials used.   04   8 Oil Purification:  • Theory of oil purifications, various methods of oil purifications.  • Use of settling / service tanks & precautions taken before entering / cleaning tanks. Principles of operation and construction of different Centrifuges for heavy fuel and lubricating oil like FOPX system, Self-dislodging  • Uses of Homogenizers.  • ALCAP system.  • Importance of LO/FO testing, Method of testing    10  TOTAL 54

Reference Books 1 H.D. McGeorge - Marine Auxiliary machinery, BH Publications. 2 Vikram Gokhale & N. Nanda - Marine Engineering Practice  3 J. K. Dhar - Basic Marine Engineering, Atmain 

sem-4 Engeering materilas 

Theory Syllabus Unit Content Hrs. 1 Structure of Atom:  Electrons and Bonding; Wave Mechanics and electronic behaviours; Electronic structure of atoms; Covalent bonding; Metallic bonding; ionic bonding and Secondary bonding.  Atomic packing-directionally and non-directionally bonded atoms; Crystal structure- Space lattices; Ionic and molecular crystals; Interfacing in crystals Points; line, surface and volume imperfections;  Non-crystalline solids; Elastomers; Long chain and molecular compounds and threedimensional network     9  2 Metals and Alloys:  Different types of iron and steel; their manufacture, properties and uses in industry. Alloys of iron and steel.  Non-ferrous metals and alloys. Properties and uses; Miscellaneous engineering materials; their properties and uses   6  3 Miscellaneous Eng. Materials:  Refractoriness, Insulating materials; Plastics and Rubber; PVC, Resins, Adhesives and Bonding Plastics, Paints.  Manufacture, properties, and selection for various engineering applications. Polyurethane foam   5  4 Testing of Materials:  Destructive Tests: Tensile Test; Compression Test; Hardness Test; Bend Test; Torsion Test & Impact Test.  Non-destructive Tests: Magnetic Particle Test; Fluorescent Test; Ultrasonic Test, Radiography Test.   6  5 Solid Solution:  Properties of solid solutions and alloys. Types of Binary alloys, Thermal Equilibrium Diagrams, Cooling curves, Eutectic and paratactic alloys, Intermetallic compounds. Allotropy of Iron, Iron-carbon Equilibrium diagrams,  T-T-T curve, Equilibrium Diagrams for Ferrous and Non-ferrous metals and alloys   6 6 Heat Treatment:  Types of heat treatment methods - Full annealing, stress relief, recrystallisation, and Spheroidising - normalising, hardening and Tempering of steel. Isothermal transformation diagrams - Hardenability, case hardening, carburizing, Nitriding, cyaniding, carbonitriding - Flame and Induction hardening.   6 7 Fatigue & Creep:  Fatigue loading, Mechanisms of fatigue, fatigue curve, Fatigue tests. Design criteria in fatigue, Corrosion fatigue. Stress concentration.  Creep phenomena and creep-resisting alloys. Creep curve. Short time and longtime creep tests. Development of creep resisting alloys.   6 8 Corrosion and its prevention:  Mechanism of corrosion, Thermodynamics & kinetics of corrosion, Chemical corrosion Electrochemical corrosion,  Anodic and Cathodic protection, Forms of metallic coatings. Anodizing, Phosphate. Introduction to ICCP   4 9 Uses of materials in shipboard application:  Chromium, Ceramic, Titanium, PTFE in Shipboard Systems. Characteristics of above materials  3 10 Selection of Materials in Shipbuilding & Marine Engineering:  Boilers, Steam and Gas turbine, Purifiers and Diesel engine components, Pumping Machinery, Components and Piping System, Engine seating.  Propellers and Rudders. Composition, strength value and other requirements for materials used.    3  TOTAL 54 



